While the TUPJ airfield chart warns of possible windshear with winds from the south and 
south-east, the winds on the day were generally light east/north easterlies.  The aftercast 
indicated the weather conditions reported by the pilot were likely to have been associated 
with an active CB cell in the vicinity of the airfield.  The Met Office did not have access to 
the full record of wind speed or direction; however, turbulence and windshear could be 
expected in association with CB activity.  
The commander’s statement indicated the approach became unstable at a late stage on 
finals and he “applied power to arrest the descent.”  The lack of information provided meant 
the investigation did not determine whether the commander’s application of power was an 
attempt to rescue an unstable approach or whether it was a low go-around during which the 
aircraft touched down before bouncing.
9
All times are UTC©  Crown copyright 2025
 AAIB Bulletin: 10/2025 N915GD AAIB-30603
The airfield authorities classified the event as an incident and therefore only submitted their 
report to ASSI.  A runway undershoot is one of the ‘typical examples’ of a serious incident 
listed in ICAO Annex 13 Attachment C, and so this was a reportable occurrence that should 
have been notified directly to the AAIB.  Following an internal review, ASSI reclassified the 
event as a serious incident and appropriately referred it to the AAIB.  While recognising 
that an undershoot had occurred, the commander did not submit an occurrence report, 
and the operator did not conduct an internal safety investigation.  The lack of amplifying 
information hampered the investigation’s ability to gain a clearer understanding of how the 
event unfolded.  Nonetheless, the commander’s brief statement, the operator’s maintenance 
report, CCTV footage, and evidence of the Rwy 07 undershoot infrastructure damage 
combined to support the conclusion that N915GD’s left mainwheel assembly struck the 
runway light on initial touchdown.  While the perimeter fence was found broken, it could not 
be conclusively determined the damage resulted from contact with N915GD’s landing gear.
Based on the visual 3⋅5° angle described by the airfield’s PAPIs, the aircraft was approximately 
80 ft below the expected approach path when it first touched down.  Given the profile of the 
undershoot short of the paved runway surface, the aircraft would not have needed to be 
much lower on the approach for hull loss to have been a credible outcome (Figure 7).
Figure 7
Illustrative touchdown geometries