When the aircraft took off from the hospital site during the fifth flight, the SRP controller’s 
arm/disarm switch was in the arm position.  In accordance with the operator’s procedures 
it should then have been set to the disarm position when the aircraft landed and set back 
to the arm position prior to takeoff.  However, the recorded data showed that as the aircraft 
approached the hospital landing site, and communication with the SRP controller was 
established, the controller was recorded as being in the disarm position.  The SRP reported 
that he had not moved this switch during the flight.  It is therefore most likely that the 
selection was synchronised correctly with the RP after the aircraft had landed at the farm, 
but a loss of synchronisation with the RP then occurred, with the selection remaining in the 
disarm position when the aircraft took off.
The checklist used by the RP and SRP did not include a formal verification (check and 
challenge) of the arm/disarm switch selection.  This increased the possibility that a loss of 
synchronisation between the two remote pilots was not detected and this risk may have 
been further increased by conducting a number of flights in relatively quick succession.
Although the SRP controller was inadvertently set in the disarm position when 
communication was established with the aircraft, this scenario had already been considered 
by the manufacturer that had designed the system so that it would not disarm the aircraft 
in this eventuality.  However, the change to the software in November 2024, which was not 
retested against the scenario above prior to its release, unintentionally resulted in the aircraft 
disarming in flight.  This also disabled the FTS, which otherwise would have automatically 
deployed the parachute.  The subsequent uncontrolled descent posed a safety hazard to 
people and property on the ground.  Given the aircraft’s weight, if it had struck a person, it 
is likely that serious or even fatal injuries may have occurred.
26
All times are UTC©  Crown copyright 2025
 AAIB Bulletin: 10/2025 PW Orca AAIB-30757