Technical aspects
Analysis of the audio signature from the witness video and separate photogrammetry 
analysis indicated that the engine achieved a maximum speed of approximately 4,300 rpm 
and this speed was maintained throughout the takeoff until the impact with the ground.  
There was no audible evidence in the recordings of any engine problems.  Additionally, 
the condition of the propeller and the ground marks indicate that the engine was delivering 
substantial power at impact.
Examination of the aircraft, while limited to some extent by the disruption caused by the 
impact and fire, did not reveal any technical defects which may have adversely affected 
the controllability of the aircraft.  Continuity of the flying control runs was established for the 
portions of the control runs which remained.
The as-found deflection of the trim tab was greater than that observed in the witness 
video.  Fire and impact damage prevented the elevator trim cable from operating after the 
accident.  The cable routing differed from that described in the constructor’s manual and 
minor damage was observed on the outer plastic sleeve.  This damage could have resulted 
from tensile forces imparted on the cable during the impact sequence, which would also 
have changed the trim tab position.  Had the damage existed prior to the accident, neither 
it nor the cable routing are likely to have adversely affected operation of the trim cable, 
as the solid core moves independently of the outer cover.  Additionally, another pilot who 
flew G-ENAA reported that the trim tab was not particularly effective and could easily be 
overcome by pilot force if it became jammed.
Given the extent of the fire damage, the possibility of a flying control restriction could not be 
completely eliminated based on the wreckage examination.  However, the rudder, elevators 
and ailerons could all be seen to be moving during periods of the CCTV and witness video 
footage and both flaps appeared symmetrically deployed.  This suggested that a control 
restriction or other control anomaly was highly unlikely.
21
All times are UTC
©  Crown copyright 2025
 AAIB Bulletin:  G-ENAA AAIB-30237
The loss of control
The video obtained by the investigation showed the aircraft accelerate and the tail initially 
rise as expected.  The aircraft tail then lowered back to the runway and the aircraft yawed 
left toward the edge of the paved surface.  The aircraft would tend to yaw left with takeoff  
power applied, and to maintain a constant heading would require active correction by the 
pilot using the rudder pedals.  As the aircraft approached the edge of the paved surface it 
lifted off, pitched up rapidly, then rolled and yawed left before striking the ground.  In the 
video the aircraft ailerons were seen to be deflected in a right-roll position.
As the aircraft pitched up, the applied g and hence the stalling speed would have increased.  
It is probable that the aircraft speed was below the increased stalling speed in the 
manoeuvre and so the wing stalled.  As there was power applied, once the wing stalled the 
torque reaction from the propellor would cause the aircraft to roll left, which was the motion 
observed.  This was followed by a right-roll aileron input, but as this action deflected  the left 
aileron downwards it would have increased the angle of attack on the left wing.  Post stall, 
this increase in angle of attack would have further reduced lift on the left wing, exacerbating 
the roll to the left, and would have increased drag causing the aircraft to yaw left.
The roll to the left would have induced a sideslip which would also have caused the aircraft 
to yaw left.  As the outside, right wing’s speed would have been increased by the yaw, the 
lift on the right wing would also have increased further exacerbating the left roll.  The aircraft 
rolled rapidly, and the left wingtip touched the ground causing the aircraft to continue to roll 
and yaw left before it came to rest.  A large fire ensued around the forward fuselage area 
and the pilot sustained fatal injuries.
Reasons for the loss of control
The accident sequence began when the natural tendency of the aircraft to yaw left during 
takeoff was not contained, leaving the aircraft heading towards the left side of the runway.  
One explanation of subsequent events was that, given the marked pitch up control input, 
the pilot was trying to lift off as he approached the edge of the paved surface.  The pilot 
may have suffered a startle response that caused his actions in the rapid pitch-up to be 
instinctive and – given the outcome – inappropriate.  The nose-up trim setting would have 
reduced the control forces required to initiate the rapid pitch-up and so the pilot may have 
over-estimated the control input required to lift off.  Once the aircraft began to roll left, the 
right-roll deflection of the ailerons observed in the video might have been an instinctive 
response from the pilot to attempt a correction of the roll attitude.
Another possible explanation for the loss of control was that the pilot became incapacitated 
at some point during the takeoff.  Post-mortem examination revealed that he was suffering 
from coronary artery disease to an extent that could account for a sudden cardiac death 
or severe chest pain impairing his ability to control the aircraft.  The conclusions of the PM 
report were more equivocal, however, and the CAA’s view was that the fact that control 
inputs were observed suggested that the pilot did not become completely incapacitated.  
Nevertheless, some level of incapacitation short of collapse could not be excluded.
22
All times are UTC
©  Crown copyright 2025
 AAIB Bulletin:  G-ENAA AAIB-30237