The gliders collided on short final to Hinton-in-the-Hedges Airfield because neither pilot
detected the other’s presence in time to take avoiding action.  The accident could have
been prevented through timely and clear radio communication by the pilots to alert other
circuit traffic of their presence, facilitated by a qualified radio operator providing an AGCS,
as licensed and approved by the CAA.
Although the airfield owner and Aeronautical Radio Station licensee had held a CAA approval
28
All times are UTC©  Crown copyright 2025
 AAIB Bulletin:  G-DJMD and G-DCTB AAIB-30061
to deliver an AGCS since 1993, no such service had historically been provided, and no radio
operators possessed the necessary qualifications.
Both gliders were equipped with radios tuned to the AGCS frequency; testing confirmed
these radios were likely capable of transmitting and receiving.
Examination of both aircraft revealed no pre-existing defects or anomalies that might have
contributed to the accident.
Safety action
The following safety action was taken:
The British Gliding Association:
 ● Sent an email to all club Chief Flying Instructors and BGA instructors
reminding them of the key attributes to avoid midair collisions during the
circuit, approach and landing.
 ● Updated the ‘Managing Flying Risk – Collision Avoidance’ section of their
website.
 ● Highlighted the updated collision avoidance information in their regular
e-newsletter to members.
The gliding club at Hinton Airfield produced an updated Daily Flying Briefing that
reminded members that:
 ● Radio checks are mandatory for the first flight of the day for club and private
gliders.
 ● Radio calls are mandatory for Downwind and Final to aid situational
awareness
The gliding club at Weston-on-the-Green Airfield amended its policy on the
requirement to make radio calls in the circuit.  Club instructors would teach
and encourage students and solo pilots to make a ‘downwind’ call when in the
circuit.  This would be reinforced during periodic check flights and promulgated
in the club’s weekly newsletter.
Published: 30 October 2025.
