Having completed their flying tasks in a local club competition, gliders G-DJMD and G-DCTB
returned to Hinton-in-the-Hedges airfield, and both aircraft manoeuvred to the north-east of
the airfield in preparation for an approach to land.  The competition required pilots to report
their position on the radio when downwind and when on final, but neither pilot was heard to
do so, meaning a critical opportunity to alter the outcome was missed, and they remained
unaware of each other’s presence until they collided on short final.  The pilot of G-DCTB
suffered serious injuries.  The pilot of G-DJMD was struck by G-DCTB’s wingtip during the
2
All times are UTC©  Crown copyright 2025
 AAIB Bulletin:  G-DJMD and G-DCTB AAIB-30061
collision and the glider then struck the ground in an inverted attitude.  The pilot of G-DJMD
suffered fatal injuries.
The investigation identified the following causal factor related to the collision:
 ● The pilots did not effectively communicate their location or intentions on the
radio, and the unalerted ‘see-and-avoid’ principle was insufficient for either
of them to be aware of the presence of the other in time to take avoiding
action when joining the circuit and on final approach.
The investigation made the following findings:
 ● When an aeronautical radio station is licensed and approved to provide an
Air Ground Communication Service, the service must be provided inside
published hours of operation, unless promulgated otherwise by NOTAM or
other suitable means.
 ● Glider pilots must hold a Flight Radiotelephony Operator Licence if they
communicate with an air traffic control or flight information unit, or an Air
Ground Communication Service.
Safety action was taken by:
 ● The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) to remind radio licensees of their
obligation to provide the service approved on their licence, and to ensure
that approvals under the Air Navigation Order accurately reflected the
responsibilities of licence holders.
 ● The British Gliding Association (BGA) to promulgate information on the
avoidance of midair collisions.
 ● The respective gliding clubs to clarify their requirements for the use of
radios by pilots.
