The tug instructor realised he had driven past the TRP while attending to speaking to the
trainee driver.  The difference in managing the energy of an aircraft which – perhaps slightly
less commonly – did not have its engines started during the pushback might have led him
to subconsciously expect the tug was stopping.  This event highlights challenges related
to performing a training role in a time-critical, dynamic environment.  ANC can help with
prioritising tasks and building situation awareness.  Any time a pushback team member
feels uncertainty, the tug should be stopped immediately so that situation awareness can
be rebuilt individually, and as a team.
The wingman and headset operator appeared to experience a level of surprise when the
tug instructor exceeded the TRP.  By the time they had wondered about his reason for doing
so – with one of them trying to get visual contact with the other – it was too late to signal that
the tug instructor should stop.  The instructor explained the difficulty in noticing hand signals
while driving, with other team members being out of his line of sight.  Accordingly, this event
highlights the importance of team members being vigilant of each other and being ready to
act when things do not go as expected.
In this case, the wingman did not use the marshalling wands.  Although there was no
requirement to used wands, they can offer more conspicuity than arms alone.
The instructor was probably startled by the collision and consequently took immediate
action to correct the error by pulling the aircraft forward again.  Resisting the urge to act
while startled allows time for more deliberate thought processes to be regained.
The driving instructor and wingman suggested the TRP was not very prominent.  The airport
operator has increased the size of TRPs at the airport.
Footnote
7 R:\SM1\1.1 SAR\1.1.2 RCO\6_PROJ_EASA\Research\2015\2015.C22 Startle Effect Management STEM\3-
Deliverables\Final Report\research-project-cover-page [accessed 11 September 2025]
72
All times are UTC©  Crown copyright 2025
 AAIB Bulletin: 12/2025   AAIB Bulletin: 12/2025 9H-QAA AAIB-30304
